Notes for Basic CompSci stuff

Consisting of:
        - programming basics concepts/definitions
        - OOP concepts/definitions
        - software development life cycle notes
        - maybe notes on data structures
        - maybe notes on algorithms
        - maybe programming languages concepts


TDD
    Test-driven development. It's a software development prcess that relies on the
    repitition of a very short development cycle, used in Agile development. TDD is
    related to the test-first programming concepts of extreme programming. In TDD
    you first write an (initially failing)_ automated test case that defines a desired
    improvement or new functino, then you produce the minimum amount of code to pass
    the that test, and finally you refactor the new code to acceptable standards.

DRY

    Don't repeat yourself. Basically don't repeat code, instead make a function to
    do something if you need to do that thing more than one time.

lambda functions
threads - concurrency
exceptions
macros

MVC
    Model-View-Controller.


The Shell

    The Shell is a program that takes commands from the keyboard and gives them to
    the operating system to perform. A Terminal/Console window is a window that
    allows you to interact with the shell.
    On *nix systems there are various different shell programs. SH was the original
    shell program for Unix, BASH is an enhanced version of SH, CSH, TSCH which is an
    improved version of CSH, KSH, ZSH, and probably others. The default shell used
    in *nix systems is usually BASH. On my Mac Bash is the default shell but the
    others listed here are all installed on the Mac.
    Bash stands for Bourne Again Shell (the creator of SH was named Bourne).
    On Linux distributions there are even several different terminal programs. On my
    Mac there is another terminal program called xterm, which is part of the XQuartz
    thing that I downloaded for something.


Number Bases

    Binary
        0, 1
        i.e.    0111 1010
    
    Octal
        0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
        i.e.    7203

    Decimal
        0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
        i.e.    1983

    Hexadecimal
        0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F
        i.e.    C92A


    Conversion Between Bases
        
        Binary/Octal/Hex to Decimal:
            ∑ (dig * base^i)  from i=0 -> n, n being number of digits
            i.e.    0x3D = 3*16^1 + D*16^0 = 48 + 13 = 61
            i.e.    0247 = 2*8^2 + 4*8^1 + 7*8^0 = 128 + 32 + 7 = 167
            i.e.    1011 = 1*2^3 + 1*2^1 + 1*2^0 = 8 + 2 + 1 = 11

        Binary to Octal:
            Group each 3 bits into 1 Octal digit.
            i.e.    1101 0011 = 011 101 011 = 353

        Binary to Hex:
            Group each 4 bits into 1 Hexadecimal digit.
            i.e.    1101 0011 = C3

        Octal to Binary:
            Ungroup each Octal digit into 3 bits.
            i.e.    715 = 111 001 101 = 0001 1100 1101

        Hex to Binary:
            Ungroup each Hex digit in 4 bits.
            i.e.    3FB8 = 0011 1111 1011 1000

        Octal to Hex:
            Convert Octal to Binary, then convert Binary to Hex.
            i.e.    472 = 100 111 010 = 0001 0011 1010 = 13A

        Hex to Octal:
            Convert Hex to Binary, then convert Binary to Octal.
            i.e.    A4E = 1010 0100 1110 = 101 001 001 110 = 5116

        Decimal to Binary:


        Decimal to Octal:


        Decimal to Hex:




How To Design Functions (HTDF from Systematic Program Design MOOC)

    Step 1
        Signature, purpose, stub:
            Signature is a comment that shows input -> output just using data types.
            Always want to use the most specific type, for example, if the input
            or output is a Natural Number (1,2,3...) then you want to put Natural
            Number as opposed to just Number.
                i.e. // Number -> Number
                i.e. // Number, String -> String

            Purpose is a succint 1-line comment that tells what the function
            is meant to do.
                i.e. // produce 2 times the given number

            Stub is a commented out declaration of the function.
            Stub must have the correct function name, the correct number of
            parameters, and produces a dummy result of the correct type.
            The 0 in the first example is just a place holder for the
            expected output when using a check-expect expression.
                i.e. // (define (double n) 0)
                i.e. // int doubleNum(int n);
                i.e. // (define (pluralize str) " ")
                i.e. // (define (pluralize str) str)

    Step 2
        Examples (for BSL - wrapped in check-expect):
            Give examples of what you expect for some input cases and the output.
            In the BSL language you can use the check-expect keyword.
            In other languages there is no check-expect so you would probably
            just comment this out and put the expected output value.
            Examples help you understand what the function must do. Use
            multiple examples to illustrate behavior.
            When you make this the examples will fail because the function
            isn't actually defined yet, but it should at least run.
            In a check-expect expression the first operand it the function
            call with parameters, the second operand is the expected output.
            The check-expect expression, when run, will return whether each
            expression either failed or passed.
            So using a check-expect means that the examples will serve as
            unit tests for the completed function.
            Enough examples should be made that tests all possible branches of
            the function (every line of code is executing between all the examples).
                i.e. (check-expect (double 3) 6)
                i.e. (check-expect (double 4.2) 8.4)

    Step 3
        Inventory - template & constants:
            Template is the function declaration and specifying what variables
            or constants the function will work with.
            The "... n" in the example means it is going to do something
            with n.
            Normally you don't keep a copy of the template, you just make a
            template as the first step in coding the body.
                i.e. (define (double n)
                        (... n))

    Step 4
        Cody Body:
            Make a copy of the template, look at everything that's been
            written before in these steps and write the function definition.
            Run the code to see if the previous tests passed now that the
            function body has been written.
                i.e. (define (double n)
                        (* 2 n))

    All the steps together Example:
        ;; Design a function called area that consumes the length of one side of
        ;; a square and produces the area of the square.

        ; Number -> Number                               ; Signature
        ; produces area of square given length of side   ; Purpose
        ; (define (area n) 0)                            ; Stub

        (check-expect (area 5) 25)                       ; Examples
        (check-expect (area 3) 9)
        (check-expect (area 3.3) (* 3.3 3.3))

        ;(define (area n)                                ; Template
        ;  (... n))

        (define (area n)                                 ; Function definition
          (sqr n))

    Every line of code should be executed by the Examples. There needs to be
    enough examples to have complete code coverage of the function, that is, all
    branches of the code (every line) must be tested. Any line of code that wasn't
    executed is highlighted in black in BSL after the program has been run.
    Anytime you think of a new case or subtlety to the function make sure to go
    back to the examples and make sure there is a test for it, and change any of
    the other Design steps if needed. Code Coverage means given all the tests, how
    much of the code has been covered. Complete Code Coverage means every possible
    branch (every line) in the code has been executed in the tests.
    When you discover boundary cases you need to write a test example for it, and
    possible change the Purpose to be more clear.





Basic Programming and OOP Concepts

    Encapsulation:
        Encapsulation is information hiding. It means hiding how something is
        done and just giving the user the interface (and how to work with the
        interface) for working with that data, whether it be a function or a
        class/object. For OOP encapsulation basically means creating
        classes/objects. It means hiding the inner workings of something so a
        user can just easily interface with it.

    Abstraction:
        Abstraction is an emphasis on the idea, qualities, and properties rather
        than the particulars. It is a suppression of detail. It hides irrelevant
        details and involves using names to reference objects. It places emphasis on what an object does rather than what an object is. So it provides a
        simple interface (generally a name and desired inputs) to work with some
        object.

    So Encapsulation is basically the creation of ways to hide data and processes
    on that data, through the use of functions and in OOP of classes/objects. And
    then Abstraction is the actually use of what is being encapsulated. So it is
    abstracting out the details of what is encapsulated, by providing a simple
    interface to work with the encapsulated data and processes. In programming
    this generally takes the form of a name and inputs. So you can interface with
    some encapsulated code simply by knowing the name that refers to it and what
    sorts of inputs it takes.

    Abstract class:
        An abstract class is a class that cannot be instantiated. It is purely a
        super-class for other classes to extend. Abstract classes have
        implementations for their methods but they must all be extended by the
        classes that use the abstract class. If an abstract class has an
        abstract method then that method is declaration only, not implementation.

    Interface:
        An interface separates structure from implementation. An interface only
        provides structure, while it is left to other software objects to deal
        with the implmentation of that stucture. An interface is ideal when you
        need the implementation to vary somewhat, on a case by case basis. An
        interface defines a generic template for a class.

    Inheritance:
        Inheritance is the ability of a new class to be created from an existing
        class by extending it. Inheritance is related to specialization, by the
        idea that a subclass is going to be a specialized version of a superclass
        and it will extend its properties to match with this specialization.

    Polymorphism:
        Polymorphism means "many shapes". It means the ability to request the
        same operations be performed by a wide range of different types of things.
        Basically its when classes that share the same interface/superclass but
        use a different implementation of those methods they inherit. Like if a
        Dog class and a Cat class inherit the method Speak, the Dog class would
        implement it as a bark and the Cat class would implement it as a meow.
        But in the code you can then use these varying objects that have different
        implementations in the exact same way because their methods have the
        same interface. Polymorphism makes code more modular and extensible
        because instead of having complicated code to provide different
        implementations you can use one piece of code to deal with the different
        varieties of implementations created through polymorphism.

        Polymorphism is realized through method overloading, method overriding,
        and operator overloading.

        Method Overloading:
            The ability to define several methods with the same name, allowing
            different implementations of the same method. The trick is they must
            have different inputs.

        Method Overriding:
            The ability of a subclass to completely override a method it
            inherits from a superclass, thus giving the method its own unique
            implementation.

        Operator Overloading:
            The ability to treat an operator (+, -, =, etc) as a polymorphic
            function that has different implementations based on what types of
            values the operator is operating on.


    Model-View-Controller (MVC):
        An architecure that separates the modeling of the domain, the
        presentation, and the actions based on user input into three separate
        classes. So the Model is the model of the domain, the View is the
        presentation, and the Controller is the actions or behaviors.


Software Development Life Cycle

    The process consisting of a series of planned activities to develop or alter
    the software products (design, develop, and test software). There are
    various models shown below.

    The stages of the SDLC go in a iterative cycle and are: planning, defining,
    designing, building, testing, deployment.

    Agile:
        Agile SDLC model is a combination of iterative and incremental process
        models with focus on process adaptability and customer satisfaction by
        rapid delivery of working software. The product is broken into small
        incremental builds, which are provided in iterations. Each iteration
        lasting just a few weeks at most.
        Tasks are divided into small time frames called time boxes to deliver
        specific features for a release. Agile process meant to be highly
        adaptable. The keys are individuals and their interactions while
        designing software (constant meetings), getting working software ready
        to go in small incremental steps, customer collaboration in each iteration
        to show off working software and get feedback, and responding to change
        with quick responses.
        As opposed to traditional SDLC models Agile doesn't focus on the entire
        project at first, it takes a quick and adaptable step by step approach.
        Agile developers work closely with their peers and are in constant
        communication throught the production.

        Highly collaborative, rapid delivery of working software in incremental steps, highly
        adaptable.


Testing

    Unit Testing:
        Testing each individual function to make sure it works correctly on its own.

    Integration Testing:
        Testing the functions together (testing the whole program) to make sure that all the
        functions work together correctly.

    Testing cycle is to do Unit Testing, then Integration Testing, and repeat.

    Black Box Testing:
        Don't take into consideration the details of a function's definition when testing it, just
        use the function call interface to come up with appropriate test cases, based on the data
        types of the function's parameters. Based on those data types you'd test "normal" inputs as
        well as boundary cases of inputs.

    Glass Box Testing:
        Take into consideration the code, rather than just the function interfaces, to see how the
        code works and base the test inputs on this. In this way you can see if their might be any
        obvious mistakes in the code that would lead to errors when given certain inputs.



Data Structures

    Abstract Data Type (ADT) is the concept behind a data structure, while the
    data structure itself is the implementation of the ADT.

    Stack:
        FILO (first in, last out) / LIFO (last in, first out)
        Push to add an element to the stack.
        Pop to remove the most recent element from the stack.
        Peek to look at the most recent element on the stack.

    Queue:
        FIFI (first in, first out)
        Enqueue to add an element to the back of the queue.
        Dequeue to remove an element from the front of the queue.

    Heap:

