Git

-download git
-go to command line and type in git to make sure it is set up correctly
-set up your name that will be attached to all the files in git with
this CL command:
            git config --global user.name "Todd Kronenberg"
- set up your email similarly to the name:
            git config --global user.email toddkronenberg@gmail.com

- now set up a git repository, which is simply a place to store git
files. So go to a directory that you have source code files in and type this command:
            git init
That command initializes the git repository for the files in that directory.

A git commit is saving a current version of a file.

Each individual project needs to be in its own git repository. Which means that
each project needs to be in its own folder/directory (and then you make that
directory a git repository).

Note that whenever you use the " -- " double dashes on the command line that
treats anything that comes after it as a filename (note the space after the
double dashes). If there is no space after the double dashes though then that
is an option, like --all.

Note that HEAD^ refers to the first parent of the HEAD commit. So HEAD^^ would
refer to the grandparent of the HEAD commit (2 commits back).
Equivalently, HEAD~n refers to the nth ancestor of the HEAD, meaning that
HEAD^ equals HEAD~1 and HEAD^^ equals HEAD~2, and so on.






command:    git help command
Shows the manual for the specified command so you can read up on
how it works.

Command:     git status
- type the "git status" command in the command line when inside the
directory in which a git repo is stored. It'll show what files have
been committed.

Command:     git rm --cached filename
This command removes a specific file from the index of files listed
in the git status, so it removes a file from being ready to commit

Command:     git rm filename
This removes the actual files from the directory. So this
is only if you want to actually delete files.

Command:     git add filename.blah
             git add --all
Use the "git add" command to either get a single file in that directory
or all the files in that directory (and all sub-directories)ready to be
committed to the git repository.
Then need to type the command:      git commit

Command:     git commit
The "git commit" command commits/saves all the files/changes listed
in the git status (ready to be committed) to the git repository. This
commits a snapshot of these files to the git repo. Need to then type
in a commit message that is a comment on why the file was committed
(i.e. what changes were made or whatever). When committing like this
you must put -m before the commit message, but the message doesn’t
need to have any quotes around it. Notice that the commit
message opens up in Vim so need to use "i" to go into edit mode and
then type it and then exit by saving & quitting back in the command
mode or whatever it's called by hitting escape and then ":wq"

Command:     git commit -a -m ‘commit message’
The "-a" adds all the files to the commit. The "-m" lets you specify
the commit message right here. So this is one command to do the add,
commit, and commit message all together. The commit message must be
in single quotes. Can’t be in double quotes or won’t work.
NOTE: Doing a commit, using the -a, only commits tracked files, that
is it doesn't commit any newly created files.

command:    git commit --amend -m 'new commit message'
The --amend option lets you add stuff to the last commit, in case you
forgot to commit something. So just add whatever you want to the
staging area and then use this command to add it to the last commit.
Optionally you can do the -m 'message' to add a new commit message to
that commit, overriding the previous message for that commit.
Don't amend something after you've pushed the commit to GitHub.

Command:     git log
Shows the history of the commits. Shows each commit with a commit ID,
which is just a really long alpha-numeric sequence, shows the author,
date, and the commit message, and the linear history of the commits.
The HEAD is the most recent commit. Can refer to each committed
instance of the file by its commit ID, but can easily refer to the
most recent commit by just the word HEAD. The most recent commit will
be at the top.

command:	git log —-graph
Shows a graphical representation of branches and merges in the log.

command:    git log --oneline --graph
Gives a visual representation of the branch mergin into master.

command:	git log —-pretty=oneline
Makes it so when you call git log each commit is just displayed on one
line, with the SHA Hash on the left and the commit message after it.

command:    git log --pretty=format:"xxx"
Using this you can format the output of the log however you want. In
place of the xxx you put your formatting. The place holders you can
use are:    %ad     author date
            %an     author name
            %h      SHA Hash
            %s      subject
            %d      ref names

command:    git log --oneline -p
The -p flag, which stands for patch, lets you see what lines were
removed and what lines were added in each commit.

command:    git log --oneline --stat
The -stat option shows you how many insertions and deletions were
made for each file in each commit.

command:    git log --until=1.minute.ago    git log --since=1.day.ago
            git log --since=1.month.ago --until=2.weeks.ago
Can specify date ranges to be output by the log. Can use the until or
since options to specify a time range of the beginning of the log until
some time ago, or since some time ago up to the present, or use both
to output the commit log since some time ago until some time ago. You
can specify times like shown above: number.timeUnit.ago     or you can
specify times with a date in the form: year-month-day, like: 2012-04-22

command:     git show
             git show theCommitID
The "git show" command outputs a specific commit on the terminal. It
will show all changes that were committed in the last commit if no
argument is given, or it will output a specific commit if the
commit ID is typed in as an argument, just need to type in the first
few (maybe five) characters of the commit ID for git to figure out
which one. So git show will show the changes in the last commit, but
to see previous commits you need to do git show and then the first
five characters of the Commit ID.
i.e.	git show 75f2b
Note: git show only shows the actual changes that were made in the
commit, not the whole files.



Branching:
Non-linear development process. Changes on one brach do not affect
other branches. Can create a branch, delete a branch if you no
longer want it, or you can merge a branch back into the main file
if you like the changes. The main branch for any project is called
Master.

command:	git branch branchName
Creates a branch with all your files in it.

command:	git checkout branchName
Switches the branch you are working on to the one specified.

command:	git branch
Shows the names of all the branches. There will be an asterisks next
to the branch that you are currently on.

command:	git merge branchName
Type this when in the side branch to merge it into the Master branch,
that way the changes you made in the side branch will be part of the
Master branch. Makes a new commit representing the point at which
the two files are merged.
If there is a file that has recent changes in each branch when they
are merged git won’t be sure which one to make the new version so
it’ll tell you there is a conflict and put both the versions of the
code in the file and tell you where the conflict is so you can choose
for yourself in the code which one should be used. The changes from
the two different branches are separated by “========“ some equal signs.
If you get a conflict, you can go to “git status” and it’ll show you
what files had conflicts, so you can then go into the files, find
the conflicts and resolve them. Once resolved you want to re-commit
that file so its committed with the conflicts resolved.

command:	git mergetool
Brings up a tool to go through all the conflicts from a merge.

command:	git branch -D branchName
Deletes the branch specified.

command:	git rebase branchName
Merges but without making a new commit representing the merge, so it
keeps the linear history of the commits. What it does is take the
commits back to when you branched, and then put the new commits from
the branch as commits on the Master branch.

command:	git revert CommitID
Can go back to a previously saved version, in case you screw something up
later on. So this makes a new commit based on an old commit so you can
jump back and make the current version an older version.

command:	git checkout —- filename(s)
Reverts current version of specified files back to how they were at the
time of the last commit.
NOTE: that checkout does not make a new commit, it just replaces the
currently saved file with an older version, you then have to commit it
to get this newer version back in the HEAD commit.

command:    git checkout CommitID
This takes you to a previous commit based on the CommitID given. You are
no longer on the master branch now, you’re not in a branch. Here you can
play around and make commits without affecting the master branch. I guess
while checking out an old commit you can branch that, and then when you
go back to your master branch you’ll see that this new branch has been
created with the old commit.

command:	git checkout CommitID filename
Replaces the specified file with an older version of it from a past commit
and commits that older version as the newest commit. It is like revert
but only with a single file instead of a whole commit.
To go back to the last commit, so to revert a single file back to what it
was in the last commit say:		git checkout HEAD filename
because the HEAD is the name of the last commit.

command:	git reset HEAD filename
Unstages the specified file that has been staged to be committed. To unstage
all files that are currently staged you just do:	git reset
Don't reset stuff after you've push to GitHub.

command:    git reset --soft HEAD^
Undoes the last commit and moves everything from that last commit back into
staging. So do this if you forgot to make some changes or stage some of the
files that you meant to commit for that last commit. The HEAD^ part of this
tells git to move the HEAD back to the last commit before the current HEAD.

command:	git reset —-hard HEAD^
This not just unstages everything that is currently staged to be committed but also reverts the current working directory back to the last commit. In other words, it
gets rid of all the changes since the last commit.
To revert the current directory back to a specific commit that isn’t the last commit,
and I think get rid of all the commits after the specified commit (though git doesn’t totally get rid of those commits, git reflog lets you see them), use:
	git reset -—hard CommitID
What git reset actually does is move the HEAD to a different spot on the timeline.
Use HEAD^^ or HEAD~2 to revert back to two commits ago, or HEAD~3 for three
commits ago, and so on.

command:	git reflog
This gives a history of everything you’ve done, not just a history of commits
like git log. So you can use the CommitID hashes listed in the git reflag
to revert back to a previous version before a hard reset.

command:	git bisect bad CommitID
		git bisect good CommitID
		git bisect start
Do a binary search over all of your commits. Helpful for finding a bug but
you don’t know when it was introduced. You tell git which commit definitely
has the bug and which commit definitely doesn’t have the bug. Then
git bisect does a binary search through the in-between commits. So what it
does is brings you into that middle commit to find the bug, you can then
just look in your files or run them or whatever you have to do to see if
the bug is in there, and if it is you type:		git bisect bad
and that way it’ll move ahead in the binary search closer to the commit
that you said was good. When you find a commit that doesn’t have the bug
you type:	git bisect good		and then git will tell you based
on what you said was bad and good as you were going through the binary
search which commit seems to have had the bug.
During this process you are not in an actual branch. So after the search
is done you just type:		git checkout master		to get
back to a branch (the master branch).

command:	git diff CommitID
git diff shows you the changes between the last commit and the current state of
the files that are not staged. If you then stage everything with git add then
git diff won’t show anything. You can specify a CommitID, or use HEAD~3 to see
the commit difference from 3 commits ago for instance, or just to see the
differences since the last commit you can either just put HEAD for the
Commit ID or put nothing and just leave the command as git diff.
You can also compare two different commits against each other, for example:
git dif HEAD^..HEAD compares the second most recent commit and the most
recent commit.
Can also use:       git diff —-staged
to see differences between the last commit and what is currently staged to be
committed.
You can also use time based ranges for git diff, just like with git log.
See the git log notes to see how to do this.

command:    git diff branchName branchName
The git diff command can also be used to compare the differences between 
two branches.

command:    git blame filename
If you don't understand some changes made at a certain commit use git
blame to see who made each commit, as well as the date of the commit
and what lines were changed and the content that was changed. Specify
the option:     --date short         to the date to output in a short
format for easier readability.




Git allows distributed development, so multiple people can be working on
a project each with the same history.

ssh-keygen
An ssh key allows you to log into a server without using a password. This
allows you to interact with sites like GitHub. So you want to set up an
ssh key on GitHub so that you don’t have to type in your password every
time you want to send something to GitHub, because your computer will have
a key on it and GitHub will know its you that way.
An ssh key has a private and public key


command:	git push theURL branchName
To send commits to GitHub, or even to send all the histories of your
files that you’ve been committing to git and now want to send to GitHub.
So to push the Master branch of a git repository to GitHub you just do:
	git push theGitHubURL master
URL format for GitHub is:	git@github.com:theCodeBear/repositoryName.git

command:    git push -u remoteName branchName
To push commits to GitHub using an alias/remoteName. The -u option basically
makes it so the next time you want to push to that GitHub repo you don't
have to specify the remote name and the branch, instead you can just type
git push.

command:	git remote add remoteName theURL
To make a shortcut for the URL so you don’t have to type in the long URL
every time you push to GitHub, you can create whats called a remote, which
acts as an alias for the URL for the repository on GitHub. By convention just
use origin as the remote name for each github repo.

command:    git remote rm remoteName
Removes a remote from the repository.

command:	git remote
Lists the remote you have to represent the URL in that repository. So if you don’t
remember what you named the remote, just use this command to see it. Using a -v
option like:    git remote -v       shows not just the name of the remote but
also the URL it is used for. The -v stands for verbose.

command:	git clone URL
If you haven’t created a repo for a project cloning a project from the internet
will pull the repo to your local computer with all the histories. The branches
won’t be pulled down when cloning.

command:	git pull URL branchName
If you already have a repo for a project you use pull instead of clone. This
takes all the changes that have been made since the last pull, and merge
them into the current local git commit version.

command:	git fetch URL branchName
The fetch command is like the pull command except that pull will auto merge
branches while fetch just updates the local branch information.

command: 	git branch -a
Lists all the branches that currently exist on a server.

command:	git checkout -b URLalias/branchName
The -b means to create a new branch. This command creates a new branch and pulls
the branch from the server to your local computer.



Excluding stuff from being track in the git repo:
If you have something you are working on in the project directory but you
don't want it to be committed to the git repo then git has a directory
where you can exlude things from the repo so they just stay on your local
computer. Keep whatever you are working on in a folder, and put that folder
in the .git/info/exclude directory. Then the folder won't show up in git
status anymore.
You can make some exclude patterns like:
    filename.ext        excluding a particular file
    *.ext               exclude all files of a given extension type
    folder/             exclude a directory
    logs/*.log          exclude .log files in logs directory
Log files should never be committed because they change for each user. To
exclude log files you should put this pattern into the .gitignore file:
    logs/*.log


Making Aliases of git commands:         git config --global alias.theAlias theCommand
For git commands that you use all the time you can make an alias to
give yourself a shorthand for typing that command. The syntax is shown
above, for example to turn status into st you would do:
    git config --global alias.st status
So then whenever you want to run git status you just have to type in git st



You can use git to actually deploy changes to a website. Set up an ssh key. Copy
the public key into the server in a directory called .ssh and in a file named
authorized_keys. This file contains a list of every ssh key that can access the
server, and you put all of the developers public keys (to the authorized_key file)
that should be able to access the server.
command:	git init —-bare
This makes a repository that does not actually contain any files, but this is
just a place to send files to.
command:	git remote add alias
		git push alias master
Sends files to website server to put new website files right onto the server.

Hooks:
A git hook is a script that fires when you do some predetermined action.